Testing again, test number two on the 2nd of February.
Testing, one, two, three.
Dave, normally we begin by asking the interviewee to describe their background and experience before they came to Brazos County.
Where did you grow up and go to school and so forth?
As a small boy in the first through the third or fourth grade, I was brought up in central western Massachusetts.
This was during the 30s, during the Depression.
And West Brookfield was a small town with one major factory, which of course had gone belly up.
My father and mother, my father was,
was an engineer and a geologist.
He had both a degree in engineering and a degree and a master's in geology, and the Quabbin Reservoir Project in western Massachusetts, which included building a 23-mile rock tunnel and two dams.
kept him gainfully employed all through the Depression.
So I was fortunate.
Later, we moved to Providence, Rhode Island.
Dad was employed by the Army Engineers, Connecticut River Flood Control.
Perhaps you won't remember, but in the 34, there was major flooding on the Connecticut.
And so we lived in Cranston, Rhode Island for a couple of years and then moved to Barrington, which is on Narragansett Bay on the east side en route from Providence to Newport.
I really call that my hometown.
I was in the high school class of 44.
Of course, that was the last class to go off to World War II.
I enlisted in the Navy that spring.
Of course, they deferred going to boot camp until
We graduated in June.
So I went to boot camp at Sampson, New York around 1st of July in 1944.
I turned 18 in July of that summer.
After boot camp, Navy sent me to Purdue University to Navy Electrical School for four months.
And then I shipped to the Southwest and Pacific.
Amusingly, I think.
I think I'm the only person that served in the US Navy in World War II who's never been and served in the Southwest Pacific has never been to the Hawaiian Islands.
We shipped nonstop from San Francisco to Numia.
And then we did a little cook's tour of the ship.
Then I was on an army transport.
I was Navy, but it was an Army transport, the Frederick Likes.
From Numea, we went to Espirito Santos in the New Hebrides.
No, Numea is in the New Hebrides.
Espirito Santos is in, I've forgotten what islands.
And then we went to Guadalcanal, trans-shipped some people there.
These areas had long been secured.
Hollandia, New Guinea.
Hollandia, New Guinea, they dumped me off, along with my sea bag and some other people.
The Navy had what they would call a receiving ship in Hollandia, and then they would assign me.
And they turned around and then signed me to the destroyer repair base right there in Hollandia.
So the last six months until the bomb was dropped, I spent in Hollandia.
And at that point, we already had orders to move up to the Philippines.
The Philippines were almost secure then.
We were thinking about the invasion of Japan.
And so most of the ships that I worked on were really landing craft that were eventually going to be assigned to make the landings.
So then I shipped to the Philippines.
I spent nine months on an island in Lady Gulf.
It was a big ship repair base.
I found out many years later that Fred Benson was stationed in Calicone, right across from that base.
The nine months after the war ended, I finally got shipped home.
I got home, I guess, probably in June of 46.
I entered Brown that fall on GI Bill, graduated from Brown with a bachelor's in physics in 1950.
I was mature enough to realize as much as I would have loved to have been a theoretical physicist, I didn't have it.
I could do applied physics, but if you recall, right after the war, one of the areas of
that many students were enamored with was atomic physics.
And I decided I couldn't do it.
I could not have gotten into graduates, a good graduate school in physics.
And so I went to work for Owens-Corning fiberglass as a product development engineer.
And again, in the post-war world, fiberglass had been a
development of World War II and the civilian markets hadn't been developed.
The first big market actually was in electrical sales.
And so I worked with a small group of engineers in a laboratory in Ashton, Rhode Island.
working with wire and cable companies, developing glass yarn for serving and braiding and knitting on wire and cable.
And I spent three or four years at fiberglass.
I enjoyed it.
I did well.
But at least at that time in fiberglass, the route up the ladder was through sales.
I spent a lot of time out there with salespeople, showing where they could sell glass to customers.
But none of the rewards came back to the people in the lab.
And eventually, I left.
I got to thinking about graduate school.
When I was at Brown, I very carefully avoided geology, because my dad had been a geologist.
But I obviously knew a lot of geology by osmosis.
I had a degree in physics, and geophysics was a new sub-discipline of the Earth Sciences that was just beginning to make some inroads.
And I applied to graduate school at MIT, was accepted.
By this time, I had been married in 1952.
My wife and I had one child when we were at MIT.
I lived in student housing.
It was referred to as Fertility Row, as you can imagine.
And we had a pediatrician for our child had a funny name.
Many years later, I happened to mention it in a crowd of people.
I said, a pediatrician had this crazy name, T. Berry Brasselton.
Have you ever heard of T. Berry Brasselton?
He is the guru of all pediatricians today.
He's retired now, but he is internationally famous.
He replaced Dr. Spock as the guru.
But anyway, so.
Yeah.
I had almost finished my coursework at MIT, and I had started to write a thesis proposal for a fellow named McDonald, Dr. McDonald.
who was a young Harvard graduate and extremely brilliant.
I don't know whether I ever could have successfully completed a dissertation under him.
He was very bright, very demanding.
But I was working on my proposal, and this is in the
Well, I should back up a minute.
I have to back up a minute.
In 1957, the summer of 57, I was tired of taking coursework at MIT and doing the language requirements.
And I got a job for the summer at Woods Hole Oceanographic.
I participated in a seismic cruise, a geophysical cruise to the Caribbean.
One of the professors was from Rice here in Texas.
The other was John Ewing, brother of Maurice Ewing, who is perhaps certainly is known in the earth science community as one of the major contributors to our understanding of the world globe.
So I went off to sea to the Caribbean.
And that was the perfect match.
Applied geophysics at sea.
I loved the sea.
And I presume part of that is because I was brought up on Narragansett Bay.
And the Navy had seen to it that I did all my sea duty on land.
And so, you know, I said, that's for me.
I went back to MIT to finish up coursework.
And that spring, I was working on my dissertation.
And that was sort of interesting because in late spring, my proposed dissertation advisor suddenly announced that he was moving to UCLA.
And he took one student with him, but he left several of us hanging.
But serendipity.
Within two weeks, I had a phone call from Woods Hole Oceanographic.
They had agreed to participate in the International Geophysical Year.
And in particular, they had committed themselves to send their Atlantis, their research vessel, at that time it was a two-masted, 160-foot yaw.
And they had committed themselves to do some joint seismic work with Lamont Doherty, LDGO, which was a laboratory established by Maurice Ewing as part of Columbia University.
The laboratory is about 20 miles up the Hudson from New York City in the Palisades.
And the Lamont ship and that research vessel was an old three-masted schooner, the Vima, which had belonged to Betty Hutton at one time.
But these were clearly in the infancy of oceanography, because the Atlantis was a two-masted sailing catch, 160 foot, and Vima was this black-hulled three-masted schooner.
They had agreed to do seismic work, two-ship seismic refraction studies that studied the crustal structure beneath the seafloor in the Indian Ocean.
I was supposed to join the Atlantis in Cape Town, but the Atlantis had engine problems, and they ended up sending the Atlantis through the Mediterranean.
to Cairo.
I joined the ship in Alexandria, Egypt.
That was one of the nice things that happened to me in that I flew military air transport service because we were on, in those days, most of the work being done at sea was funded by the Navy.
And the mass schedule was such that I had to go to Europe two weeks before the ship arrived in Alexandria.
So I spent a week in Paris at $2 a night at the military hotel.
And then went on to Rome, Cairo, whatever.
But I joined the ship.
Alexandria.
We steamed down through the Suez Canal into the Red Sea, out into the Gulf of Aden, into the Indian Ocean, joined up with Atlantis, did some work in the Indian Ocean, Gulf of Aden, and in the Red Sea.
We won't get into that.
There are some sea stories there that if I ever sit down, I really should write them.
But coming back through the Mediterranean, we did some more work.
And eventually, some of that seismic work in the Mediterranean became part of my dissertation.
How did I get involved in that?
Well, that spring, Woods Hole had made this commitment and they only had the head of the geophysics group at Woods Hole was a geophysicist.
He was capable of doing the seismic work.
The only other person was a woman who was very good, but in those days, they didn't allow women to go to sea on the ships.
And so they called me up and said, did I want to do the seismology?
And so it came just two weeks after
I had bombed out as far as my dissertation proposal was concerned.
And so I jumped at the turn.
And I jumped at it, and I was responsible for doing the seismic work on the Atlantis.
And I shared in the data, and some of it became part of my dissertation.
With this intense interest in marine geophysical work, it was clear that, and I wanted to work on the data, so I sort of informally migrated to Woods Hole.
I was still enrolled in MIT, but I was working as a project scientist at Woods Hole.
And this is before there were any formal arrangements between the two institutions.
Eventually, I completed my degree in 63.
And so I started looking, casually looking for a job.
The geophysics, there weren't many young people equipped to teach geophysics at the time.
Woods Hole, of course, offered me a position to stay.
And the other possibility was Lamont,
the only other I never did investigate would have been Scripps and surprisingly A&M had an oceanography department and a geophysics department or a geophysics program at least and had a research vessel and so the department head in
geology at that time was Shirley Lynch.
I don't know whether you know him.
He contacted me and we met in New York.
And I did make a visit to A&M in the spring because the weather was fairly nice.
I didn't ask the right questions.
This is 1963.
1963.
Describe your impressions of A&M and this community.
Wait till I get there.
Oh, okay.
Okay.
Wait till I get there.
I'm just saying right now I did not.
asked all the right questions or I might not have come.
There were two things that really made it interesting.
One was A&M was offering me twice as much money as anybody else.
And I can remember that.
It was $14,000 starting salary for a young assistant professor who'd never been in a classroom, never been taught before.
The other thing that made it attractive is that two of my colleagues,
at Woods Hole, one who had been really sort of a mentor to me and who I considered to be, he was a genius who could never, people couldn't work with him, so he never produced very much.
But he was great with me.
I didn't have, he wasn't my major professor anymore, but he was a friend.
They came to SCAS.
SCAS, SCAS, Southwest Center for Advanced Studies.
This was the institution that was, well, I'm sure you'll remember.
Connolly was governor.
There were two leaders in the Texas community that were trying hard to bring research-level science to Texas.
Eric Johnson, who was mayor of Dallas, and Cecil Green, who was the founder of what is now TI.
And they established this institution in Richardson that's now UT Dallas.
Two of my colleagues went there.
I found out, so that was attractive.
Because the type of things I wanted to do involved more than just one person can't go out and do seismic experiments.
It's going to take more than one person.
So that was an aside.
I didn't realize how that was going to play out.
But I came partly because of this awareness, this awakening that was going on in the science community.
And I would be, it would be fair to say that many of my friends said I was going to a dead end.
Okay.
So, okay, I accepted the job.
I left my wife and two children in Woods Hole.
We'd had two more children in the case.
We had three children now.
And my oldest son and I drove to Texas in our Studebaker Lock.
And we arrived the last week in August.
Okay.
And it was warm.
It was warm.
And we started house hunting.
And we were staying in a little rundown motel about halfway into Bryan.
But it did have a window air conditioner.
So we would...
Here I am coming from Cape Cod, where it's a magnificent 70 degrees or whatever, and here it is hitting 98, 99 every day.
And my son and I were looking for housing, and then we'd flee back to that motel room in the air conditioner in the afternoon.
Before we talk about campus, let's just talk about the restaurant facilities at that time.
If I recall, there were only, there were two cafeterias.
There was one down at the bus station.
I've forgotten.
And there was another one somewhere.
And then I think there was Coach Naughton's.
Pancake House at East Gate.
Yeah.
No, no, wait a minute.
He had a pancake house.
Was that, well, it later became just a restaurant.
Yes.
Oh, okay.
Right, right.
So that was the variety.
The campus geology, I was hired by the geology department.
I actually replaced Peter Denier, who you may have known.
Peter and I remained good friends for many years.
And he had had one very fine student, a Turkish fellow, and the name doesn't come to me right now, who
They had started a geophysics program, and Peter was doing some research in the Gulf testing marine gravimeters.
I don't know how much of a teaching program he had started.
The strange thing to me was that I suddenly arrived here and I found out that the department had permission to grant an undergraduate degree in geophysics, an MS, and a PhD.
I arrived on the scene.
I was the only geophysicist.
with the exception of one grad student who did a little bit of the teaching.
But if I recall, there were two graduate students and one undergraduate in geophysics.
In geology, there was a reasonable number of students.
In my view, the geology faculty were totally non-research-oriented.
Turn it off for a moment.
When I arrived on the scene in the department, I had been hired by, oh, my name slips my mind.
We'll think of it later.
We can add that.
Well, by the time I got to Texas, he was no longer, he had retired.
He had promised a lot of things.
He had promised me, number one, that Monik Talwani, who later became director of LDGO and was also a director down at HAARC, had also been hired.
So I knew that I had another person to talk with.
That was a lot of hooey.
He also promised me that I would have access to equipment and so forth and so on.
And that was hooey.
When I arrived on the scene, the acting department head was Trav Parker.
The other faculty members at the time were Clay Seward, Fred Smith,
Mel Schroeder.
Mel Schroeder, yeah.
And that's about it, I think.
None of these individuals were doing any research.
They were doing classical geology.
And I know Fred Smith was a pretty darn good field geologist.
But none of them had any feeling for what was going on outside of just classical geology.
And here we were in a hotbed of oil petroleum exploration.
really a mecca for geophysics people as well as geologists.
And what I couldn't understand is that these people had lots of contacts in the oil industry, but some of it never rubbed off in trying to understand what was going on in terms of what we were finding out at sea, what led to this revolution, seafloor spreading, plate tectonic revolution.
Now the department head that first year of geology was whom?
Trav Parker.
Trav Parker, he was acting head.
So you reported to him?
I reported to him.
Now what's interesting is the geology department was in engineering.
Fred Benson was the dean.
The first summer I was at Woods Hole, I mean at, in the department, I went back to Woods Hole and did more work in the Mediterranean.
The next summer, my first summer in Texas, I would wear, I was wearing Bermuda shorts, very nice Bermuda shorts.
The building was non-air conditioned.
It was dripping.
And the word came down for me that Fred Benson had seen this young professor walking around, not so young either, walking around in Bermuda shorts, and that I was to understand that I was to dress formally.
OK?
That shook me up.
The other thing that shook me up, when I had first arrived at A&M, the building was not air conditioned.
And yet all these professors had air conditioners in their window.
Then they tell me that they were all personally owned.
The university did not provide you with an air conditioner.
Well, they found one for me somewhere on a research grant or somewhere.
But you couldn't live in those offices without an air conditioner.
Where was the department located and describe the
physical facilities for the department?
The department was in what is now the old wing of the Halbooty Building.
It had that magnificent tower structure on the front, which later came off.
My office was on the second floor.
I had a suite of offices because there were so few staff members.
And it was shared with a grad student who was a good friend of mine, Bill Jones, Billy Bob Jones, who I once introduced as William Jones, and he corrected me because I was still, had not adapted to Texas-style names.
So anyway, Bill
shared the office suite with me and we've been friends for many years.
I also had a great big walk-in safe up there and I perhaps shouldn't say this but I kept explosive cartridges in there.
I mean I did some seismic work around here and I had these little squib charges and I kept those in there.
What were your teaching and research responsibilities that assignments that first year?
I arrived on the scene and here we have a graduate undergraduate program and I'm supposed to teach all the courses and
Buddy Atwood was a grad student.
He helped teach the undergraduate geophysics.
But at that time, if I recall, the geologists were required to take two courses in geophysics, one in applied and one in sort of global geophysics.
So there were two courses that had to be taught.
There were only two grad students, but two or three grad students.
And, you know, there were several courses on the books.
I have to go back now.
But I know in those first few years, I was teaching theoretical seismology.
I was teaching.
I taught all the courses.
I don't know how, I didn't have much time.
What about the laboratory capabilities?
Laboratory facilities were almost.